BacFluxL
A workflow for genomic analysis of bacterial long reads.
   
________             _______________             ______
___  __ )_____ _________  ____/__  /___  _____  ____  /
__  __  |  __ `/  ___/_  /_   __  /_  / / /_  |/_/_  /
_  /_/ // /_/ // /__ _  __/   _  / / /_/ /__>  < _  /___
/_____/ \__,_/ \___/ /_/      /_/  \__,_/ /_/|_| /_____/
                                                                                                            
BacFluxL v1.0.1

August 2024
Authors and Contributors
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, Center for Health & Bioresources
•	Livio Antonielli
•	Dominik K. Großkinsky
•	Hanna Koch
•	Friederike Trognitz
IPK Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research, Cryo and Stress Biology
•	Manuela Nagel
•	Alexa Sanchez Mejia
Synopsis
BacFluxL is a specialized and automated bioinformatics workflow designed exclusively for the processing and analysis of bacterial long-read genomic data produced by Oxford Nanopore Technologies. The workflow accepts long reads as input, which can be subjected to a series of analyses, including quality control, optional error correction of assembled contigs, and functional annotation. In addition, it offers the possibility to infer secondary metabolites, screen for antimicrobial resistance genes, and investigate the presence of plasmids and phages. BacFluxL is an adaptation of BacFlux, which was originally designed for the analysis of bacterial genomic data sequenced with Illumina. This new version focuses solely on the analysis of ONT long reads, offering a more targeted approach for this type of data.
Table of Contents
•	Quick Start
•	Rationale
•	Description
•	Installation
•	Configuration
•	Running BacFluxL
•	Output
•	Acknowledgements
•	Citation
•	References
Quick Start
This guide gets you started with BacFluxL. Here's a quick guide:
•	Download the latest release:
•	#git command
git clone https://github.com/iLivius/BacFluxL.git
•	Configure the config.yaml:
o	Specify the input directory containing ONT reads. When naming your samples:
	Avoid using underscores (_) in sample names.
	Each sample name should end with _ont followed by an appropriate extension (e.g. .fq.gz).
	Be sure to carefully read the configuration section for full compatibility with the workflow.
o	Provide the desired location for the analysis outputs and the path to the following databases:
	blast_db: path to the NCBI core nt database directory
	eggnog_db: path to the eggNOG diamond database directory
	gtdbtk_db: path to the GTDB R220 database directory
	bakta_db: path to the Bakta database directory
	platon_db: path to the Platon database directory
•	Install Snakemake (if not installed already) and activate the environment:
•	#optional, if not installed already
•	mamba create -c conda-forge -c bioconda -n snakemake snakemake
•	#activate Snakemake environment
conda activate snakemake
•	Run BacFluxL. Within the main workflow directory, launch the pipeline as follows:
snakemake --sdm conda --cores 50
This command uses the following options:
--sdm: uses conda for dependency management
--cores 50: cap the amount of local CPUs at this value (adjust as needed).
Now you're all set to run BacFluxL! Refer to the installation, configuration and running BacFluxL sections for detailed instructions.
Rationale
The analysis of bacterial Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) data necessitates the integration of various bioinformatics tools. BacFluxL is a follow-up version of BacFlux, specifically tailored for sequences generated by Oxford Nanopore Technologies. It is primarily intended for long reads sequenced with the latest chemistry R10.4.1 and basecalled with Dorado using either accurate or super accurate models.
BacFluxL allows researchers to concentrate on the biological implications of their data, minimizing the need for technical data analysis.
Description
Here's a breakdown of the BacFluxL workflow:
1.	Preprocessing of Long Reads:
o	ONT sequences are trimmed and quality filtered using Filtlong.
2.	Assembly of Long Reads:
o	Filtered ONT reads are assembled using Flye. For more details, see the next step.
3.	Decontamination and Error Correction:
o	Filtered reads are mapped back to contigs using minimap2 and samtools.
o	Local alignments of contigs are performed against the NCBI nt database using BLAST+.
o	Contaminant contigs are checked with BlobTools. Unless otherwise specified (see configuration section for more details), the output of this step will be parsed automatically to discard contaminants based on the relative taxonomic composition of the contigs.
o	Medaka can be used to generate a consensus sequence from the assembled contigs and the original long reads. This consensus sequence should have a higher accuracy than the original assembled contigs, but this is not always the case, especially if ONT reads were base-called with the latest versions of the super accurate model of Dorado. For a deeper insight, please refer to Ryan Wick's bioinformatics blog. By leaving the medaka_model parameter blank, the error correction step won't be performed. By providing a fast model as parameter, BacfluxL will set Flye to assemble long reads using the --nano-raw parameter. If either an accurate or super accurate model is provided, Flye will use the --nano-hq parameter, instead. Same will happen if the medaka_model is left blank, assuming that data are high quality.
o	Bacterial chromosomes are reoriented using dnaapler, to start canonically with the dnaA sequence. Other replicons like plasmids and bacteriophages are also reoriented, using repA and terL, respectively, as starting point.
o	Genome completeness and contamination of long-read assembled bacterial chromosomes are assessed with CheckM using taxon-specific markers.
4.	Taxonomic Analysis:
o	Accurate taxonomic placement is performed with GTDB-Tk using a curated reference database.
5.	Annotation:
o	Contigs are annotated using Prokka and Bakta for functional prediction.
o	Further functional annotation is provided with EggNOG.
o	Secondary metabolites are inferred with antiSMASH.
6.	Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR):
o	Contigs are screened for antimicrobial resistance and virulence genes using ABRicate.
7.	Plasmids:
o	The presence of plasmids is investigated with Platon and confirmed with a BLAST search.
8.	Prophages:
o	Contigs are screened for viral sequences with VirSorter2, followed by CheckV for refinement.
9.	Reporting:
o	Results are parsed and aggregated to generate a report using MultiQC.
Installation
BacFluxL downloads automatically all dependencies and several databases. However, some external databases require manual download before running the workflow.
1.	Download BacFluxL:
Head over to the Releases section of the repository. Download the latest archive file (typically in .zip or .tar.gz format). This archive contains the BacFluxL Snakefile script, the config.yaml configuration file, and an envs environment directory. Extract the downloaded archive into your desired location. This will create a directory structure with the necessary files and directories. Alternatively, download via command line as:
#git command
git clone https://github.com/iLivius/BacFluxL.git
2.	Install Snakemake:
BacFluxL relies on Snakemake to manage the workflow execution. Find the official and complete set of instructions here. To install Snakemake as a Conda environment:
#install Snakemake in a new Conda environment
mamba create -c conda-forge -c bioconda -n snakemake snakemake
3.	Databases:
While BacFluxL automates the installation of all software dependencies, some external databases need to be downloaded manually. Unless you have installed them already. In that case, skip this paragraph and jump to the configuration section.
Here are the required databases and instructions for obtaining them.
o	NCBI core nt database, adapted from here:
o	#create a list of all core nt links in the directory designated to host the database (recommended)
o	rsync --list-only rsync://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/core_nt.*.gz | grep '.tar.gz' | awk '{print "ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/" $NF}' > nt_links.list
o	
o	#alternatively, create a list of nt links for bacteria only 
o	rsync --list-only rsync://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/nt_prok.*.gz | grep '.tar.gz' | awk '{print "ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/" $NF}' > nt_prok_links.list
o	
o	#download in parallel, without overdoing it
o	cat nt*.list | parallel -j4 'rsync -h --progress rsync://{} .'
o	
o	#decompress with multiple CPUs
o	find . -name '*.gz' | parallel -j4 'echo {}; tar -zxf {}'
o	
o	#get NCBI taxdump
o	wget -c 'ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz'
o	tar -zxvf taxdump.tar.gz
o	
o	#get NCBI BLAST taxonomy
o	wget 'ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/taxdb.tar.gz'
o	tar -zxvf taxdb.tar.gz
o	
o	#get NCBI accession2taxid file
o	wget -c 'ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/accession2taxid/nucl_gb.accession2taxid.gz'
gunzip nucl_gb.accession2taxid.gz
NOTE: the complete NCBI core nt database and taxonomy-related files should take around 223 GB of hard drive space.
o	eggNOG diamond database:
o	#the easiest way is to install a Conda environment with eggnog-mapper, first
o	conda create -n eggnog-mapper eggnog-mapper=2.1.12
o	
o	#activate the environment
o	conda activate eggnog-mapper
o	
o	#then, create a directory where you want to install the diamond database for eggnog-mapper 
o	mkdir /data/eggnog_db
o	#change /data/eggnog_db with your actual PATH
o	
o	#finally, download the diamond db in the newly created directory 
download_eggnog_data.py --data_dir /data/eggnog_db -y
NOTE: the eggNOG database requires ~50 GB of space.
o	GTDB database:
o	#move first inside the directory where you want to place the database, then download and decompress either the full package or the split package version
o	
o	# full package
o	wget -c https://data.gtdb.ecogenomic.org/releases/release220/220.0/auxillary_files/gtdbtk_package/full_package/gtdbtk_r220_data.tar.gz
o	tar xzvf gtdbtk_r220_data.tar.gz
o	rm gtdbtk_r220_data.tar.gz
o	
o	# split package (alternative)
o	base_url="https://data.gtdb.ecogenomic.org/releases/release220/220.0/auxillary_files/gtdbtk_package/split_package/gtdbtk_r220_data.tar.gz.part_"
o	suffixes=(aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak)
o	printf "%s\n" "${suffixes[@]}" | xargs -n 1 -P 11 -I {} wget "${base_url}{}"
o	cat gtdbtk_r220_data.tar.gz.part_* > gtdbtk_r220_data.tar.gz
o	tar xzvf gtdbtk_r220_data.tar.gz
rm gtdbtk_r220_data.tar.gz
NOTE: compressed archive size ~102 GB, decompressed archive size ~108 GB.
o	Bakta database:
o	#Bakta database comes in two flavours. To download the full database, use the following link (recommended):
o	wget -c https://zenodo.org/records/10522951/files/db.tar.gz
o	tar -xzf db.tar.gz
o	rm db.tar.gz
o	
o	#alternatively, download a lighter version
o	wget https://zenodo.org/record/10522951/files/db-light.tar.gz
o	tar -xzf db-light.tar.gz
o	rm db-light.tar.gz
o	
o	#if the AMRFinderPlus db gives an error, update it by activating the Bakta Conda env and running the following command by targeting the Bakta db directory:
amrfinder_update --force_update --database db/amrfinderplus-db/
NOTE: according to the source the light version should take 1.4 GB compressed and 3.4 GB decompressed, whereas the full database should get 37 GB zipped and 71 GB unzipped.
o	Platon database:
o	#download the database in a directory of your choice 
o	wget https://zenodo.org/record/4066768/files/db.tar.gz
o	tar -xzf db.tar.gz
rm db.tar.gz
NOTE: according to the source, the zipped version occupies 1.6 GB and 2.8 GB when unzipped.
Configuration
Before running BacFluxL, you must edit the config.yaml file with a text editor. The file is organized in different sections: links, directories, resources and parameters, respectively.
•	links
This section should function as expected without modifications. Therefore, it is recommended to change the following link only if there is a need to update the database version:
o	checkv_link: Path to the CheckV database for viral genome quality assessment
•	directories
Update paths based on your file system:
o	fastq_dir: This is the directory containing the ONT long reads for each provided genome, in FASTQ format. You can provide as many files as you like, subject to the following conditions:
a.	Files must have one of the following extensions: fastq, fq, fastq.gz or fq.gz.
b.	You can provide multiple samples, but all files should have the same extension. In other words, do not mix files with different extensions.
c.	Sample names should be formatted as follows: strain-1_ont.fq, strain-2_ont.fq. In this example, BacFluxL will interpret the name of the strains as “strain-1” and "strain-2". Strain names cannot contain underscores. Please notice that the name of each strain should be followed by “_ont”. Here’s an example of how your input directory might look if it contains the ONT reads of one strain, CDRTa11:
d.	ahab@pequod:~/data$ ls -lh
e.	total 1,8G
-rw-rw-r-- 1 ahab ahab 1.8G May 20 12:00 CDRTa11_ont.fastq
o	out_dir: This directory will serve as the storage location for all output files generated by BacFluxL. By default, all necessary software and databases will be installed in this directory, within Conda environments. If you reuse this output directory for future runs, it will prevent the need for reinstalling everything from scratch.
o	blast_db: Path to the NCBI core nt (recommended) or prokaryotic database only, and related taxonomic dependencies, see installation.
o	eggnog_db: Path to the diamond database for eggNOG.
o	gtdbtk_db: Path to the R220 release of GTDB.
o	bakta_db: Path to either the light or full (recommended) database of Bakta.
o	platon_db: Path to the Platon database.
•	resources
In this section you can specify the hardware resources available to the workflow:
o	threads: Max number of CPUs used by each rule
•	parameters
i.	Database selection: BacFluxL requires specifying the version of the NCBI nt database for BLAST operations. You can choose between the core_nt and nt_prok versions. By default, the config.yaml configuration file is set to use the core_nt database. For instructions on installing the BLAST database, refer to the installation.
ii.	Medaka model: This refers to the version of the medaka_model used for basecalling the long reads. If left blank, the Medaka correction step will be skipped.
iii.	Genus filtering: BacFluxL includes an optional parameter to specify the bacterial genus of contigs you wish to retain in the final assembly. If left blank, BacFluxL will automatically keep contigs associated with the most abundant taxon, based on relative composition determined through BLAST analysis. While this approach generally works well, it has limitations, such as reduced resolution at the species level due to reliance on the cumulative best scores of BLAST hits. Additionally, this method may be problematic if the contaminant organism belongs to the same genus as your target organism, or if you are working with co-cultured closely related species or strains. If the genus parameter introduces more issues than benefits, simply remove the genus option from the config.yaml file.
	Using the genus parameter: if a contaminant is ascertained to be more abundant than your target organism, you can re-run the workflow after reviewing the assembly output. Specify the genus of the desired bacterial taxon you want to keep in during the re-run.
	Disabling the genus filtering: if either the automatic inference of contaminant contigs or the manual selection of the desired taxon are still not working for you, simply delete the genus option from the parameters. In this case, only contigs tagged as "no-hit" after BLAST search will be filtered out.
Running BacFluxL
BacFluxL can be executed as simply as a Snakefile. Please refer to the official Snakemake documentation for more details.
# first, activate the Snakemake Conda environment
conda activate snakemake

# navigate inside the directory where the BacFluxL archive was downloaded and decompressed

# launch the workflow
snakemake --sdm conda --cores 50
NOTE: Starting from Snakemake version 8.4.7, the --use-conda option has been deprecated. Instead, you should now use --software-deployment-method conda or --sdm conda.
Output
The workflow output reflects the steps described in the description section. Here's a breakdown of the subdirectories created within the main output folder, along with explanations of their contents:
•	01.pre-processing: Long reads trimmed and filtered by Filtlong (v0.2.1).
•	02.assembly: Long-read assembly performed by Flye (v2.9.4).
•	03.post-processing: Contains the following sub-directories:
o	contaminants: Assembled contig selection based on BLAST+ (v2.15.0) search and BlobTools (1.1.1) analysis. Check the composition text file for a quick overview of the relative composition of your assembly.
o	consensus: Contigs are error corrected with long reads using Medaka (v1.11.3). This step is optional and can be skipped by leaving the medaka_model parameter blank in the config.yaml file. See the description section for more details.
o	fix_start: Replicons are reoriented by dnaapler (v0.8.0) as follows: bacterial chromosomes will start with the dnaA gene, plasmids with repA and phages with terL.
o	completenness_evaluation: CheckM (1.2.3) output based on long-read assembled contigs, after decontamination, error correction and reorientation.
•	04.taxonomy: Taxonomic placement performed by GTDB-Tk (v2.4.0).
•	05.annotation: Contains the following sub-directories:
o	prokka: Legacy annotation performed by Prokka (v1.14.6).
o	bakta: Accurate annotation outputted by Bakta (v1.9.4).
o	eggnog: Functional annotation produced by EggNOG mapper (v2.1.12).
o	antismash: Secondary metabolites inferred by antiSMASH (v7.1.0).
•	06.AMR: Contigs are screened for the presence of antimicrobial resistance elements and virulence factors, using ABRicate (v1.0.1).
•	07.plasmids: Contigs are screened for the presence of plasmid replicons with Platon and results verified by BLAST search to avoid false positive. Contigs ascertained as plasmids are reported in the verified plasmids file.
•	08.phages: Contigs are screened for the presence of viral sequences using VirSorter2 (v2.2.4), followed by CheckV (v1.0.3) for refinement:
o	virsorter: Following the instructions provided here, viral groups (i.e. dsDNA phage, NCLDV, RNA, ssDNA, and lavidaviridae) are detected with a loose cutoff of 0.5 for maximal sensitivity. Original sequences of circular and (near) fully viral contigs are preserved and passed to the next tool.
o	checkv: This second step serves to quality control the results of the previous step to avoid the presence of non-viral sequences (false positive) and to trim potential host regions left at the ends of proviruses.
•	09.report: MultiQC (v1.23) is used to parse and aggregate the results of the following tools:
i.	Prokka (v1.14.6)
ii.	Bakta (v1.9.4)
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) [Project I6030-B].
Citation
Antonielli, L., Koch, H., Trognitz, T., Nagel, M., Sanchez Mejia, A., & Großkinsky, D. K. (2024). BacFluxL: A workflow for genomic analysis of bacterial long reads. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11243909
References
1.	Blin, K., Shaw, S., Augustijn, H. E., Reitz, Z. L., Biermann, F., Alanjary, M., Fetter, A., Terlouw, B. R., Metcalf, W. W., Helfrich, E. J. N., van Wezel, G. P., Medema, M. H., & Weber, T. (2023). antiSMASH 7.0: New and improved predictions for detection, regulation, chemical structures and visualisation. Nucleic Acids Research, 51(W1), W46–W50. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkad344
2.	Bouras, G., Grigson, S. R., Papudeshi, B., Mallawaarachchi, V., & Roach, M. J. (2024). Dnaapler: A tool to reorient circular microbial genomes. Journal of Open Source Software, 9(93), 5968. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.05968
3.	Camacho, C., Coulouris, G., Avagyan, V., Ma, N., Papadopoulos, J., Bealer, K., & Madden, T. L. (2009). BLAST+: Architecture and applications. BMC Bioinformatics, 10, 421. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-10-421
4.	Cantalapiedra, C. P., Hernández-Plaza, A., Letunic, I., Bork, P., & Huerta-Cepas, J. (2021). eggNOG-mapper v2: Functional Annotation, Orthology Assignments, and Domain Prediction at the Metagenomic Scale. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 38(12), 5825–5829. https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msab293
5.	Challis, R., Richards, E., Rajan, J., Cochrane, G., & Blaxter, M. (2020). BlobToolKit – Interactive Quality Assessment of Genome Assemblies. G3 Genes|Genomes|Genetics, 10(4), 1361–1374. https://doi.org/10.1534/g3.119.400908
6.	Chaumeil, P.-A., Mussig, A. J., Hugenholtz, P., & Parks, D. H. (2022). GTDB-Tk v2: Memory friendly classification with the genome taxonomy database. Bioinformatics, 38(23), 5315–5316. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btac672
7.	Chen, L., Zheng, D., Liu, B., Yang, J., & Jin, Q. (2016). VFDB 2016: Hierarchical and refined dataset for big data analysis--10 years on. Nucleic Acids Research, 44(D1), D694-697. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv1239
8.	Chen, S., Zhou, Y., Chen, Y., & Gu, J. (2018). fastp: An ultra-fast all-in-one FASTQ preprocessor. Bioinformatics, 34(17), i884–i890. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty560
9.	Danecek, P., Bonfield, J. K., Liddle, J., Marshall, J., Ohan, V., Pollard, M. O., Whitwham, A., Keane, T., McCarthy, S. A., Davies, R. M., & Li, H. (2021). Twelve years of SAMtools and BCFtools. GigaScience, 10(2), giab008. https://doi.org/10.1093/gigascience/giab008
10.	Doster, E., Lakin, S. M., Dean, C. J., Wolfe, C., Young, J. G., Boucher, C., Belk, K. E., Noyes, N. R., & Morley, P. S. (2020). MEGARes 2.0: A database for classification of antimicrobial drug, biocide and metal resistance determinants in metagenomic sequence data. Nucleic Acids Research, 48(D1), D561–D569. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz1010
11.	Ewels, P., Magnusson, M., Lundin, S., & Käller, M. (2016). MultiQC: Summarize analysis results for multiple tools and samples in a single report. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), 32(19), 3047–3048. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btw354
12.	Feldgarden, M., Brover, V., Haft, D. H., Prasad, A. B., Slotta, D. J., Tolstoy, I., Tyson, G. H., Zhao, S., Hsu, C.-H., McDermott, P. F., Tadesse, D. A., Morales, C., Simmons, M., Tillman, G., Wasilenko, J., Folster, J. P., & Klimke, W. (2019). Validating the AMRFinder Tool and Resistance Gene Database by Using Antimicrobial Resistance Genotype-Phenotype Correlations in a Collection of Isolates. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 63(11), e00483-19. https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.00483-19
13.	Guo, J., Bolduc, B., Zayed, A. A., Varsani, A., Dominguez-Huerta, G., Delmont, T. O., Pratama, A. A., Gazitúa, M. C., Vik, D., Sullivan, M. B., & Roux, S. (2021). VirSorter2: A multi-classifier, expert-guided approach to detect diverse DNA and RNA viruses. Microbiome, 9(1), 37. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-020-00990-y
14.	Gupta, S. K., Padmanabhan, B. R., Diene, S. M., Lopez-Rojas, R., Kempf, M., Landraud, L., & Rolain, J.-M. (2014). ARG-ANNOT, a New Bioinformatic Tool To Discover Antibiotic Resistance Genes in Bacterial Genomes. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 58(1), 212–220. https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.01310-13
15.	Huerta-Cepas, J., Szklarczyk, D., Heller, D., Hernández-Plaza, A., Forslund, S. K., Cook, H., Mende, D. R., Letunic, I., Rattei, T., Jensen, L. J., von Mering, C., & Bork, P. (2019). eggNOG 5.0: A hierarchical, functionally and phylogenetically annotated orthology resource based on 5090 organisms and 2502 viruses. Nucleic Acids Research, 47(D1), D309–D314. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1085
16.	Ingle, D. J., Valcanis, M., Kuzevski, A., Tauschek, M., Inouye, M., Stinear, T., Levine, M. M., Robins-Browne, R. M., & Holt, K. E. (2016). In silico serotyping of E. coli from short read data identifies limited novel O-loci but extensive diversity of O:H serotype combinations within and between pathogenic lineages. Microbial Genomics, 2(7), e000064. https://doi.org/10.1099/mgen.0.000064
17.	Jia, B., Raphenya, A. R., Alcock, B., Waglechner, N., Guo, P., Tsang, K. K., Lago, B. A., Dave, B. M., Pereira, S., Sharma, A. N., Doshi, S., Courtot, M., Lo, R., Williams, L. E., Frye, J. G., Elsayegh, T., Sardar, D., Westman, E. L., Pawlowski, A. C., … McArthur, A. G. (2017). CARD 2017: Expansion and model-centric curation of the comprehensive antibiotic resistance database. Nucleic Acids Research, 45(D1), D566–D573. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw1004
18.	Kolmogorov, M., Yuan, J., Lin, Y., & Pevzner, P. A. (2019). Assembly of long, error-prone reads using repeat graphs. Nature Biotechnology, 37(5), 540–546. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-019-0072-8
19.	Langmead, B., & Salzberg, S. L. (2012). Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nature Methods, 9(4), Article 4. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1923
20.	Mölder, F., Jablonski, K. P., Letcher, B., Hall, M. B., Tomkins-Tinch, C. H., Sochat, V., Forster, J., Lee, S., Twardziok, S. O., Kanitz, A., Wilm, A., Holtgrewe, M., Rahmann, S., Nahnsen, S., & Köster, J. (2021). Sustainable data analysis with Snakemake (10:33). F1000Research. https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.29032.2
21.	Nayfach, S., Camargo, A. P., Schulz, F., Eloe-Fadrosh, E., Roux, S., & Kyrpides, N. C. (2021). CheckV assesses the quality and completeness of metagenome-assembled viral genomes. Nature Biotechnology, 39(5), Article 5. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-00774-7
22.	Oxford Nanopore Technologies. (2023). Medaka [Python]. https://github.com/nanoporetech/medaka
23.	Oxford Nanopore Technologies. (2025). Dorado [C++]. https://github.com/nanoporetech/dorado
24.	Parks, D. H., Chuvochina, M., Rinke, C., Mussig, A. J., Chaumeil, P.-A., & Hugenholtz, P. (2022). GTDB: An ongoing census of bacterial and archaeal diversity through a phylogenetically consistent, rank normalized and complete genome-based taxonomy. Nucleic Acids Research, 50(D1), D785–D794. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab776
25.	Parks, D. H., Imelfort, M., Skennerton, C. T., Hugenholtz, P., & Tyson, G. W. (2015). CheckM: Assessing the quality of microbial genomes recovered from isolates, single cells, and metagenomes. Genome Research, 25(7), 1043–1055. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.186072.114
26.	Schwengers, O., Barth, P., Falgenhauer, L., Hain, T., Chakraborty, T., & Goesmann, A. (2020). Platon: Identification and characterization of bacterial plasmid contigs in short-read draft assemblies exploiting protein sequence-based replicon distribution scores. Microbial Genomics, 6(10), mgen000398. https://doi.org/10.1099/mgen.0.000398
27.	Schwengers, O., Jelonek, L., Dieckmann, M. A., Beyvers, S., Blom, J., & Goesmann, A. (2021). Bakta: Rapid and standardized annotation of bacterial genomes via alignment-free sequence identification. Microbial Genomics, 7(11), 000685. https://doi.org/10.1099/mgen.0.000685
28.	Seemann, T. (2014). Prokka: Rapid prokaryotic genome annotation. Bioinformatics, 30(14), 2068–2069. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu153
29.	Seemann, T. (2023). ABRicate [Perl]. https://github.com/tseemann/abricate
30.	Wick, R. (2021). Filtlong [C++]. https://github.com/rrwick/Filtlong
31.	Wick, R. (2023). Yet another ONT accuracy test: Dorado v0.5.0. Ryan Wick’s Bioinformatics Blog. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10397818
32.	Wick, R., & Holt, K. E. (2022). Polypolish: Short-read polishing of long-read bacterial genome assemblies. PLOS Computational Biology, 18(1), e1009802. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009802
33.	Zankari, E., Hasman, H., Cosentino, S., Vestergaard, M., Rasmussen, S., Lund, O., Aarestrup, F. M., & Larsen, M. V. (2012). Identification of acquired antimicrobial resistance genes. The Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 67(11), 2640–2644. https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/dks261

